# Akiba Module Development Guide

Akiba modules are detachable components that run on the Akiba framework. Since Akiba is written in Kotlin, Akiba Modules currently only support Kotlin (writing in Java is theoretically possible but has not been practically verified).

Akiba modules support:

- Maven library import and usage: Add required Maven dependencies in build.gradle.kts to enable the module to access any Maven packages.
- Dependency on other Akiba modules: Akiba modules can depend on other modules (circular dependency is not allowed), which can be configured in build.gradle.kts.
- Data interaction: Akiba provides data interaction interfaces to save module output data to the Akiba database (based on PostgreSQL).
- Data interaction with other modules: During runtime, Akiba modules can generate temporary data that is not saved to the database. Temporary data is stored in Map, and subsequent modules can access the temporary data generated by previous modules through keys.
- Batch multithreaded execution: Akiba supports performing the same pipeline operations on large-scale binary files. Module data for different files are isolated from each other, but processing modules for different files run in parallel, while processing modules for the same file run sequentially.

## 1. Akiba Module Main Class

### 1.1 Akiba Module Main Class Definition

The main class of an Akiba module must be a subclass of `AkibaModule` (`org.iotsplab.akiba.module.AkibaModule`):

```kotlin
abstract class AkibaModule (
    private val configPath: String? = null,
    private val defaultConfig: Any? = null,
    val id: Int = -1,
    protected val program: Program? = null,
    protected val properties: Map<String, String?> = mapOf(),   // deprecated
    consoleLogLevel: Level = Level.INFO,
    fileLogLevel: Level = Level.INFO,
    tableName: String? = null,
)
```

Parameter description:
- `configPath`: Module configuration file path, used to save the content of this module's configuration items. The path format should be `<filename>@<JSON path>`, where JSON path uses Jackson format, similar to UNIX file paths. For example: `config.json@/module_data` represents the JSON object at JSON path `/module_data` in `config.json`. You can write both Akiba main configuration and module configuration in one file, in which case the filename can be omitted as `@`, such as `@@/module_data`.
- `defaultConfig`: Default configuration items for the module, which will be used when the module path does not exist.
- `id`: ID of the file to be processed, used to identify the current binary file being processed, unique.
- `program`: Ghidra Program context of the file to be processed, all reverse analysis operations need to be performed within this context.
- `properties`(deprecated): Module properties, used to save module property data.
- `consoleLogLevel`: Console log level, default is `INFO`.
- `fileLogLevel`: File log level, default is `INFO`.
- `tableName`: The data table name corresponding to this module, i.e., the data generated by this module will ultimately be saved to which data table.

If a module does not need configuration and has no configuration class, parameters `configPath` and `defaultConfig` can be omitted when inheriting.

For the type of configuration class, use `@WithConfigClass` to modify the module main class to specify:

```kotlin
// Package: org.iotsplab.akiba.utils
@Target(AnnotationTarget.CLASS)
@Retention(AnnotationRetention.RUNTIME)
annotation class WithConfigClass(val clazz: KClass<*>)
```

If the module class needs custom serializer/deserializer, use `@WithConfigSerializer` and `@WithConfigDeserializer` to modify the module main class to specify. Before Akiba runs this module, it will use the specified deserializer to deserialize and obtain the module configuration class object:

```kotlin
// Package: org.iotsplab.akiba.utils
@Target(AnnotationTarget.CLASS)
@Retention(AnnotationRetention.RUNTIME)
annotation class WithConfigSerializer(val serializer: KClass<out JsonSerializer<*>>)

@Target(AnnotationTarget.CLASS)
@Retention(AnnotationRetention.RUNTIME)
annotation class WithConfigDeserializer(val deserializer: KClass<out JsonDeserializer<*>>)
```

### 1.2 Akiba Runtime

In the main configuration file, you can define the location of configuration items, console log level, file log level, data table name, and maximum runtime for each module:

```json
{
  "tasks": [
    {
      "mainClassName": "org.iotsplab.akiba.module.AkibaExample",
      "timeout": 600,
      "consoleLogLevel": "debug",
      "fileLogLevel": "debug",
      "tableName": "example_table"
    }
  ]
}
```

By default, if a module times out, it will be immediately cancelled, followed by running the next module. If an exception occurs during module runtime, the module will be marked as failed, and subsequent modules will not be run.

If a module wants to be marked as failed when it times out, use `@FailOnCancelled` to modify:

```kotlin
// Package: org.iotsplab.akiba.utils
@Target(AnnotationTarget.CLASS)
@Retention(AnnotationRetention.RUNTIME)
annotation class FailOnCancelled
```

If a module never needs timeout limitation under any circumstances, use `@IgnoreRuntimeTimeout` to modify:

```kotlin
// Package: org.iotsplab.akiba.utils
@Target(AnnotationTarget.CLASS)
@Retention(AnnotationRetention.RUNTIME)
annotation class IgnoreRuntimeTimeout
```

If a module does not need to run any tasks, the public classes and methods contained in this module can still be used by other modules that depend on it, serving as a utility module. Use the `@PureDependency` annotation class to modify.

Example:

```kotlin
@WithTableColumn("strings", "JSONB")
class AkibaExample(
    id: Int,
    program: Program,
    consoleLogLevel: Level = Level.INFO,
    fileLogLevel: Level = Level.INFO,
    tableName: String? = "example_table"
): AkibaModule(
    id = id,
    program = program,
    consoleLogLevel = consoleLogLevel,
    fileLogLevel = fileLogLevel,
    tableName = tableName     // Because we use PostgreSQL to save data, the table name should be small cased
) {
    // ......
}
```

## 2. Akiba Functional Code

Akiba's functional code is located in `startProcess` of `AkibaModule`, all modules will start working with this as the entry point.

In `AkibaModule`, some utility methods are provided:

```kotlin
// Get/set temporary data for this binary file by Key. For `getTaskData`, if the input Key is `null`, return all temporary data.
suspend fun getTaskData(key: String?): Any?
suspend fun setTaskData(key: String, value: Any?)

// Get basic information data (`BinaryMetadata`) of this binary file, the definition of this class is as follows:
suspend fun getMetadata()

@Serializable
data class BinaryMetadata(
    val id: Int,           // ID of the file to be processed
    val originalPath: String,      // Original path of the file to be processed
    val processedPath: String? = null, // Processed path of the file after cutting
    val arch: String? = null,      // Processor architecture of the file to be processed
    val format: String? = null,    // File format of the file to be processed (ELF, exe, etc.)
    val compilerSpec: String? = null,  // Compiler specification of the file to be processed
    val loadProperties: List<ImportManager.FileSegment> = listOf(),    // Import rules of the file to be processed
    val checksum: String,          // Checksum of the file to be processed
    val processedChecksum: String? = null  // Processed checksum of the file after cutting
)

// Extract file from Jar, in some cases, we may need to package some other files into the module Jar package, which can be extracted through this method.
protected fun extractFileInJar(inPath: String, outPath: Path)

// Update data to data table, if the column does not exist, it will be created, otherwise the original data will be overwritten.
protected fun updateData(data: Map<String, Any?>)

// Update error message to data table, if the column does not exist, it will be created, otherwise the original error message will be overwritten.
protected fun updateErr(msg: String)

// Clear error message.
protected fun clearErr()
```

## 3. Akiba Module API

Akiba supports modules exposing their own APIs. In a serial task flow, preceding modules can expose their APIs, which can be called by subsequent modules.

To expose an API, add the `@TaskInterface` annotation to the method:

```kotlin
// Package: org.iotsplab.akiba.utils
@Target(AnnotationTarget.FUNCTION)
@Retention(AnnotationRetention.RUNTIME)
annotation class TaskInterface
```

To call another module's API, use the following method:

```kotlin
// function specifies the function to call, args is the parameter list
protected suspend fun callTaskAPI(function: KFunction<*>, vararg args: Any?): Any?
```

Note: In a batch serial task flow, if a class A exposes an API, then for a subsequent module class B with a specified id, calling A's exposed API is actually equivalent to calling the API in the A instance with the same id, as shown in the example below:

```kotlin
class A(...): AkibaModule(...) {
    @TaskInterface
    fun getData(): Int { return id + 100 }
}

class B(...): AkibaModule(...) {
    suspend fun startProcess() {
        val data = callTaskAPI(A::getData)
        println(data)
    }
}
```

For the two module main classes defined above, if a batch task needs to run two binary files with `id` 1 and 2, and A runs before B, then in the B instance with id = 1, the output value can only be 101, while the B with id = 2 outputs a value of only 102.

## 4. Akiba Database

### 4.1 Akiba Database Overview

Akiba implements data storage based on PostgreSQL. In implementation, Akiba uses a database daemon to start an HTTP service, which provides several interfaces for data operations, including data read/write, PostgreSQL instance creation, data backup, etc. Documentation for all interfaces can be found in [Akiba DB Daemon Usage Guide](https://github.com/IoTS-P/Akiba-DB-Daemon/blob/master/Usage_guide.md).

At the module runtime level, users only need to specify the Akiba username, password, and instance name in the main configuration file. During Akiba runtime, modules can interact with the specified database instance. **Currently, the authentication function of the Akiba database daemon is not fully implemented. In the given Docker service, please uniformly use the username akiba and password akiba to complete all functions. The authentication function will be developed as soon as possible.**

Currently, Akiba provides three subcommands for operating database instances:

- `instance-create`: Database instance creation
- `instance-backup`: Database instance backup
- `instance-restore`: Database instance recovery

Specific parameters can be found in [Akiba Framework README](https://github.com/IoTS-P/Akiba-Framework/blob/master/README.md).

### 4.2 Akiba Database Instance Structure

Database initialization creates 4 data tables, 1 view, and 1 index:

- `binaries`: Original binary file information
- `processed_binaries`: Processed binary file information
- `results`: Global task data
- `db_backup_tree`: Database backup tree (not yet implemented)
- `using_binaries`: View of actually used binary file information (i.e., if a file exists in `processed_binaries`, use the processed file; otherwise, use the original file)

Specific definitions can be found in [Akiba DB Daemon Usage Guide](https://github.com/IoTS-P/Akiba-DB-Daemon/blob/master/Usage_guide.md).

### 4.3 Akiba Module Data Table Structure

In the module class definition, data table columns can be customized. By default, a module's data table will have 5 columns:

- `id`: Binary file ID, indicating which binary file this row of data belongs to
- `start_timestamp`: Start time of the most recent run of this module
- `finish_timestamp`: End time of the most recent run of this module
- `execute_time`: Time spent in the most recent run of this module
- `err_msg`: Error message that occurred during the most recent module run (if a previous module encountered an error during runtime and a subsequent module re-runs successfully, this column will clear the error message)

In addition to the above 5 columns, modules can customize other data columns using the `@WithTableColumn` annotation class:

```kotlin
// Package: org.iotsplab.akiba.utils
@Target(AnnotationTarget.CLASS)
@Retention(AnnotationRetention.RUNTIME)
@Repeatable
annotation class WithTableColumn(val name: String, val type: String)
```

Currently supported data types include:
- `integer`, `bigint`
- `double precision`
- `text`
- `timestamptz`
- `interval`
- `boolean`
- `jsonb`
- `bytea`

This annotation class can be used repeatedly, meaning a module can define multiple data columns. In the example below, the data table belonging to this module will have a total of 8 columns, i.e., 5 columns defined by the module and 3 custom columns:

```kotlin
@WithTableColumn(name = "my_column1", type = "text")
@WithTableColumn(name = "my_column2", type = "bytea")
@WithTableColumn(name = "program_string_count", type = "integer")
class MyModule(): AkibaModule() {
    //...
}
```

If a module needs to create a data view, use the `@WithView` annotation class:

```kotlin
// Package: org.iotsplab.akiba.utils
@Target(AnnotationTarget.CLASS)
@Retention(AnnotationRetention.RUNTIME)
@Repeatable
annotation class WithView(val viewName: String, val creationSql: String)
```

This annotation class can be used repeatedly, meaning a module can define multiple data views. **Note: Since this annotation class takes SQL statements as data view creation statements, it is insecure. When using modules developed by others, pay attention to related security issues.**

If a module does not need to create a data table, not even the default 5 columns of data, use the `@DoNotCreateTable` annotation class. Note: Once Akiba discovers that this module does not need to create a data table, it will not create a data table or data view, even if it uses `@WithTableColumn` or `@WithView`.

```kotlin
// Package: org.iotsplab.akiba.utils
@Target(AnnotationTarget.CLASS)
@Retention(AnnotationRetention.RUNTIME)
annotation class DoNotCreateTable
```

## 5. Binary File Cutting

Binary file cutting is an optimization made by Akiba for firmware files to improve processing efficiency. In many cases, firmware files contain large segments of bytes all being `\x00`, which in some cases can even reach over 100MB, severely affecting the efficiency of some tools and analysis processes, and increasing unnecessary memory consumption. Therefore, Akiba provides a binary file cutting function, which automatically cuts the binary file into multiple small segments and maps the segments to their original offsets in the file, saving them to the `load_properties` column in the `binaries` table of the database. The example below indicates that our cut binary file is only 1024 bytes long, and the segment of length 1024 starting at offset 0 in the cut file corresponds to offset 1000000 in the original file. (The byte segment originally starting at the 1000000th byte in the original file now starts at the 0th byte in the new file)

```json
{"oldOffset": 1000000, "newOffset": 0, "length": 1024}
```

Akiba only attempts cutting operations when it cannot recognize the file type. For files containing explicit formats (such as ELF, EXE, etc.), cutting operations will not be executed.